---
sidebar_position: 3
---

import { NestedSandpack } from "../../src/NestedSandpack";

# Custom Content

The `Sandpack` component you used in the precious section is called a `preset`. It wraps the all the individual components and provides sensible defaults.

Presets make it easy to adopt `sandpack`, while offering extensive configurability. The first thing we will look at is how to configure the content that runs inside `sandpack`.

## Templates

By default your `Sandpack` instance starts with a predefined `template`. 
Each template contains all the `files` and `dependencies` needed to start a project. For instance, the `vue` 
template will contain the starter files generated by the `vue-cli`, and the `react` template those generated by `create-react-app`.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
<NestedSandpack nestedProps={`  // Try out the included templates below!
    template="react"
    // template="react-ts"
    // template="angular"
    // template="vue"
    // template="vue3"
    // template="vanilla-ts"
    // template="vanilla" // default`}
/>

The template prop accepts a string and has the following valid options: `react`, `react-ts`, `vue`, `vue3`, `angular`, `vanilla`, and `vanilla-ts`. If the template prop is not passed or has an invalid value, it defaults to `vanilla`.

## Custom File Contents

Once you've chosen your starter template, you will most likely want to pass custom code into your `Sandpack` instance. The simplest way to do this, is to add and override files via the `files` prop.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
<NestedSandpack
  setupCode={`import { Sandpack } from "@codesandbox/sandpack-react";
const code = \`export default function App() {
  return <h1>Hello Sandpack</h1>
}\`;`}
  nestedProps={`  template="react"
    files={{
      "/App.js": code,
    }}`}
  />

The `files` prop accepts an object, where each `key` is the **relative path** of that file in the sandbox folder structure. Files passed in through the `files` prop override those in the `template` structure. Since each `template` uses the same type to define the files, you can overwrite the contents of any of the template files.

Keep in mind that the tabs only show the name of the file and not the full path. For instance, if you want to overwrite `/index.js` in the `vanilla` template, you need to specify `/src/index.js` as the corresponding `key` in the `files` object. You can check the full paths for each of the templates in the [template definitions](https://github.com/codesandbox/sandpack/tree/main/sandpack-react/src/templates)

:::note Leading Slash
Don't forget the leading slash (`/`) when setting the file paths.
:::

:::info Available Files
Notice that when passing the `files` prop, only the content you pass there is available in the file tabs. The other files in the template are still bundled together, but you don't see them anymore.
:::

## Dependencies

Any `template` will include the needed dependencies, but you can specify any additional dependencies.

### NPM Dependencies

Inside `customSetup` prop you can pass a `dependencies` object. The `key` should be the name of the package, while the value is the `version`, in exactly the same format as it would be inside `package.json`.

```jsx
<Sandpack
  template="react"
  files={{
    "/App.js": `...`,
  }}
  customSetup={{
    dependencies: {
      react: "17.0.2",
      "react-dom": "17.0.2",
      "react-scripts": "4.0.0",
    },
  }}
/>
```

### Static External Resources

You can also pass an array of `externalResources` into the `options` prop to specify static links to external CSS or JS resources elsewhere on the web. These resources get injected into the `head` of your HTML and are then globally available.

```jsx
<Sandpack
  options={{
    'externalResources': [
      "https://unpkg.com/@tailwindcss/ui/dist/tailwind-ui.min.css"
    ]
  }}
  template="react"
/>
```

## Advanced Usage

### Hidden Files

Sometimes you might want to pass some custom code to `Sandpack`, but you don't want the users to see that code. For example, you might have some stylesheet that should not be editable but helps you in your examples.

Instead of passing a `string` as the value of each `file` in the `files` prop, you can pass an object. With this format the content is passed as the `code` property and you can pass additional flags
to customize the sandpack experience. For example, you can pass a `hidden` flag for files that you don't want to show to the user:

```jsx
<Sandpack
  files={{
    "/App.js": `...`,
    "/button.js": `...`,
    "/link.js": {
      code: `...`,
      hidden: true,
    },
  }}
  template="react"
/>
```

The `hidden` flag is `false` by default.

:::info
You can use the object notation only for the files which need additional flags, while the other files can be passed as a `string`.
:::

### Active File

You can also specify the `active` file, which is open in the code editor
when the component mounts. If no `active` flag is set, the first file will be active by
default:

```jsx
<Sandpack
  files={{
    '/App.js': reactCode,
    '/button.js': {
      code: buttonCode,
      active: true,
    }
    '/link.js': {
      code: linkCode,
      hidden: true,
    },
  }}
  template="react"
/>
```

:::info
The `active` flag has precendence over the `hidden` flag. So a file with both `hidden` and `active` set as `true` will be visible.
:::

### openPaths and activePath

You can override the entire hidden/active system with two settings (`openPaths` and `activePath`) inside the
`options` prop. 

Notice that both options require you to match the exact file paths inside the sandbox, so use with caution as this can quite easily create errors in the long term.

```jsx
<Sandpack
  template="react"
  files={{
    "/App.js": reactButtonCode,
    "/button.js": buttonCode,
  }}
  options={{
    openPaths: ["/App.js", "/button.js", "/index.js"],
    activePath: "/index.js",
  }}
/>
```

:::info
When `openPaths` or `activePath` are set, the `hidden` and `active` flags on the
`files` prop are ignored.
:::

### Custom Entry File

Additionally, you can also specify a different `entry` file for the sandbox. The entry file is the starting point of the bundle process.

```jsx
<Sandpack
  template="react"
  files={{
    "/App.js": `...`,
  }}
  customSetup={{
    entry: "/index.js",
  }}
/>
```

:::warning
If you change the path of the entry file, make sure you control all the files that go into the bundle process, as prexisting settings in the `template` might not work anymore.
:::

### Fully Custom Setup

Sometimes you might not want to start from any of the preset templates. If so, you can pass a full `customSetup` object that contains everything needed for your custom `Sandpack` configuration.

Most individual parts of the `customSetup` have been described above, but for a full overview of what is accepted in a custom setup, check out the [type definitions](https://github.com/codesandbox/sandpack/blob/main/sandpack-react/src/types.ts)